README.md, before:

# Cyrius: WGS-based CYP2D6 genotyper
Cyrius is a tool to genotype CYP2D6 from a whole-genome sequencing (WGS) BAM file. Cyrius uses a novel method to solve the problems caused by the high sequence similarity with the pseudogene paralog CYP2D7 and thus is able to detect all star alleles, particularly those that contain structural variants, accurately. Please refer to our [paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41397-020-00205-5) for details about the method.   

## Running the program

This Python3 program can be run as follows:
```bash
python3 star_caller.py --manifest MANIFEST_FILE \
                       --genome [19/37/38] \
                       --prefix OUTPUT_FILE_PREFIX \
                       --outDir OUTPUT_DIRECTORY \
                       --threads NUMBER_THREADS
```
The manifest is a text file in which each line should list the absolute path to an input BAM/CRAM file.
For CRAM input, it’s suggested to provide the path to the reference fasta file with `--reference` in the command.    

## Interpreting the output  

The program produces a .tsv file in the directory specified by --outDir.  
The fields are explained below:  

| Fields in tsv     | Explanation                                                    |
|:------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sample            | Sample name                                                    |
| Genotype          | Genotype call                                                  |   
| Filter            | Filters on the genotype call                                   |   

A genotype of "None" indicates a no-call.  
There are currently four possible values for the Filter column:  
-`PASS`: a passing, confident call.   
-`More_than_one_possible_genotype`: In rare cases, Cyrius reports two possible genotypes for which it cannot distinguish one from the other. These are different sets of star alleles that result in the same set of variants that cannot be phased with short reads, e.g. \*1/\*46 and \*43/\*45. The two possible genotypes are reported together, separated by a semicolon.   
-`Not_assigned_to_haplotypes`: In a very small portion of samples with more than two copies of CYP2D6, Cyrius calls a set of star alleles but they can be assigned to haplotypes in more than one way. Cyrius reports the star alleles joined by underscores. For example, \*1_\*2_\*68 is reported and the actual genotype could be \*1+\*68/\*2, \*2+\*68/\*1 or \*1+\*2/\*68.  
-`LowQ_high_CN`: In rare cases, at high copy number (>=6 copies of CYP2D6), Cyrius uses less strict approximation in calling copy numbers to account for higher noise in depth and thus the genotype call could be lower confidence than usual.     
  
A .json file is also produced that contains more information about each sample.  
  
| Fields in json    | Explanation                                                    |
|:------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Coverage_MAD      | Median absolute deviation of depth, measure of sample quality  |
| Median_depth      | Sample median depth                                            |
| Total_CN          | Total copy number of CYP2D6+CYP2D7                             |
| Total_CN_raw      | Raw normalized depth of CYP2D6+CYP2D7                          |
| Spacer_CN         | Copy number of CYP2D7 spacer region                            |
| Spacer_CN_raw     | Raw normalized depth of CYP2D7 spacer region                   |
| Variants_called   | Targeted variants called in CYP2D6                             |
| CNV_group         | An identifier for the sample's CNV/fusion status               |
| Variant_raw_count | Supporting reads for each variant                              |
| Raw_star_allele   | Raw star allele call                                           |
| d67_snp_call      | CYP2D6 copy number call at CYP2D6/7 differentiating sites      |
| d67_snp_raw       | Raw CYP2D6 copy number at CYP2D6/7 differentiating sites       |

## Troubleshooting  

Common causes for Cyrius to produce no-calls are:  
-Low sequencing depth. We suggest a sequencing depth of 30x, which is the standard practice recommended by clinical genome sequencing.  
-The depth of the CYP2D6/CYP2D7 region is much lower than the rest of the genome, most likely because reads are aligned to alternative contigs. If your reference genome includes alternative contigs, we suggest alt-aware alignment so that alignments to the primary assembly take precedence over alternative contigs.  
-The majority of reads in CYP2D6/CYP2D7 region have a mapping quality of zero. This is probably due to some post-processing tools like bwa-postalt that modifies the mapQ in the BAM. We recommend using the BAM file before such post-processing steps as input to Cyrius.

Commit message:

docs: make licensing of repository internally consistent
the v1.1.1 release of this repo contained conflicting source licensing (GPL3 contributions to an
Apache2 project). This contribution directionality is invalid according to Apache:
https://www.apache.org/licenses/GPL-compatibility.html. To preserve consistency as best as possible
while respecting the evident intentions of the past contributors, the project is being relabeled as
GPL 3.

README.md, after:

# Cyrius: WGS-based CYP2D6 genotyper


## Overview of long-term OSS maintenance fork

Cyrius was converted from open (GPL 3 or Apache 2) to Polyform Strict
licensing after v1.1.1. This fork is designed to preserve the open source
codebase used in the releases up to and including v1.1.1, and to provide
a repo for maintenance patches moving forward.

### Licensing

As of v1.1.1, licensing of the codebase was ambiguous. The LICENSE.txt
file included in the repository was Apache 2, but all source files had
GPL 3 headers for all contributions. This configuration of licensing
[is not valid](https://www.apache.org/licenses/GPL-compatibility.html), as
GPL 3 and Apache 2 are not compatible in that direction. As such, to preserve
the license structure of the repository and the copyleft nature of GPL,
the license file is being replaced with GPL 3 for all releases after v1.1.1.


## Original overview from Cyrius repo

Cyrius is a tool to genotype CYP2D6 from a whole-genome sequencing (WGS) BAM file. Cyrius uses a novel method to solve the problems caused by the high sequence similarity with the pseudogene paralog CYP2D7 and thus is able to detect all star alleles, particularly those that contain structural variants, accurately. Please refer to our [paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41397-020-00205-5) for details about the method.   

## Running the program

This Python3 program can be run as follows:
```bash
python3 star_caller.py --manifest MANIFEST_FILE \
                       --genome [19/37/38] \
                       --prefix OUTPUT_FILE_PREFIX \
                       --outDir OUTPUT_DIRECTORY \
                       --threads NUMBER_THREADS
```
The manifest is a text file in which each line should list the absolute path to an input BAM/CRAM file.
For CRAM input, it’s suggested to provide the path to the reference fasta file with `--reference` in the command.    

## Interpreting the output  

The program produces a .tsv file in the directory specified by --outDir.  
The fields are explained below:  

| Fields in tsv     | Explanation                                                    |
|:------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sample            | Sample name                                                    |
| Genotype          | Genotype call                                                  |   
| Filter            | Filters on the genotype call                                   |   

A genotype of "None" indicates a no-call.  
There are currently four possible values for the Filter column:  
-`PASS`: a passing, confident call.   
-`More_than_one_possible_genotype`: In rare cases, Cyrius reports two possible genotypes for which it cannot distinguish one from the other. These are different sets of star alleles that result in the same set of variants that cannot be phased with short reads, e.g. \*1/\*46 and \*43/\*45. The two possible genotypes are reported together, separated by a semicolon.   
-`Not_assigned_to_haplotypes`: In a very small portion of samples with more than two copies of CYP2D6, Cyrius calls a set of star alleles but they can be assigned to haplotypes in more than one way. Cyrius reports the star alleles joined by underscores. For example, \*1_\*2_\*68 is reported and the actual genotype could be \*1+\*68/\*2, \*2+\*68/\*1 or \*1+\*2/\*68.  
-`LowQ_high_CN`: In rare cases, at high copy number (>=6 copies of CYP2D6), Cyrius uses less strict approximation in calling copy numbers to account for higher noise in depth and thus the genotype call could be lower confidence than usual.     
  
A .json file is also produced that contains more information about each sample.  
  
| Fields in json    | Explanation                                                    |
|:------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Coverage_MAD      | Median absolute deviation of depth, measure of sample quality  |
| Median_depth      | Sample median depth                                            |
| Total_CN          | Total copy number of CYP2D6+CYP2D7                             |
| Total_CN_raw      | Raw normalized depth of CYP2D6+CYP2D7                          |
| Spacer_CN         | Copy number of CYP2D7 spacer region                            |
| Spacer_CN_raw     | Raw normalized depth of CYP2D7 spacer region                   |
| Variants_called   | Targeted variants called in CYP2D6                             |
| CNV_group         | An identifier for the sample's CNV/fusion status               |
| Variant_raw_count | Supporting reads for each variant                              |
| Raw_star_allele   | Raw star allele call                                           |
| d67_snp_call      | CYP2D6 copy number call at CYP2D6/7 differentiating sites      |
| d67_snp_raw       | Raw CYP2D6 copy number at CYP2D6/7 differentiating sites       |

## Troubleshooting  

Common causes for Cyrius to produce no-calls are:  
-Low sequencing depth. We suggest a sequencing depth of 30x, which is the standard practice recommended by clinical genome sequencing.  
-The depth of the CYP2D6/CYP2D7 region is much lower than the rest of the genome, most likely because reads are aligned to alternative contigs. If your reference genome includes alternative contigs, we suggest alt-aware alignment so that alignments to the primary assembly take precedence over alternative contigs.  
-The majority of reads in CYP2D6/CYP2D7 region have a mapping quality of zero. This is probably due to some post-processing tools like bwa-postalt that modifies the mapQ in the BAM. We recommend using the BAM file before such post-processing steps as input to Cyrius.
